---
tags: docker kubernetes
title: Kubernetes 2
---

Dependencies specified in the [first #kubernetes post]({{ site.baseurl }}/2019/10/28/k8s.html) -- link at the bottom of this page. Onward!

# ReplicaSets

Replicas provide scalability and fault-tolerance.

ReplicaSets do for Pods what Pods do for containers. We specify via the `spec` property how many instances of a Pod should be running, and the ReplicaSet will ensure that the status is always as close as possible to the spec.

There is a property `matchLabels` that sets which labels a ReplicaSet will look for Pods to have. If the number of Pods that match the specified `matchLabels` criteria is either more or less than the number of `replicas` in the `spec`, the ReplicaSet will either create or terminate a Pod(s) until the status matches the spec -- pending available resources in the cluster.

- `spec.replicas` property must contain number of required insances (replicas) of the Pod(s) that match labels in `matchLabels`.
- `spec.selector.matchLabels` property must contain at least one label that will be required to exist.
- `spec.metadata.labels` property sets the labels for Pod in the `spec`.
- `spec.template.spec.containers` property must be specified.

## Labels

Show:

```sh
kubectl get pods --show-labels
```

Show pod names:

```sh
kubectl get pods -o name
```

Given replica-set.yaml,

```yaml
---
template:
  metadata:
    labels:
      my-label: awesome-type
```

remove a label:

```sh
kubectl label $POD_NAME my-label-
```

Add label:

```sh
kubectl label $POD_NAME my-label=my-awesome-label
```

# Services

[Kubernetes networking model](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/networking/#the-kubernetes-network-model)
Services expose Pod ports to a
There is no relationship between Services and ReplicaSets. Both refer to Pods through labels.

```sh
PORT=$(kubectl get svc go-demo-2-svc -o jsonpath="{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}")
IP=$(minikube ip)
curl "http://$IP:$PORT"
```

NodePort -- exposed on every k8s node. Accessible from outside the cluster.
Port -- exposed on every pod in the service. Accessible from within the cluster.
TargetPort -- this port will be available on the pod. Container must be running service on this port.
ContainerPort -- analogous to `EXPOSE` in Dockerfile. Informative only.
